How American Politics Went Insane
It happened gradually—and until the U.S. figures out how to treat the problem, it will only get worse.

‘Jonathan Rauch - The Atlantic - Ual(/AURUSt20767SSU | Politics

Recommendation for Annotating While You Read: Read and annotated the text in the following way,
1). HIGHLIGHT words you don't know (this is your vocabulary) and BRIEFLY note the definition/synonyms;
2). UNDERLINE key ideas (usually one per paragraph);

3). write QUESTIONS that you have in the margins;

4). write the THESIS of the essay on the last page (the thesis is the central assertion of the author).

IT'S 2020, FOUR YEARS FROM
Now.

‘The campaign is under way
to succeed the president, who is
retiring after a single wretched term.
Voters are angrier than ever — at
paltcians, at compromisers, at the
establishment. Congress and the
White House seem incapable of
‘working together on anything, even
when their interests align. With
lawmaking at a standstil, the
president's use of executive orders
and regulatory discretion has
reached a level that Congress views
a dictatorial - not that Congress can do anything about, except fie lawsuits that the divided Supreme Court, its three
vacancies unfilled, has been unable to resolve.

On Capitol Hil, Speaker Paul Ryan resigned after proving unable to pass a budget, or much else, The House
bumed through two more speakers and one “acting” speaker, a job invented folowing four speakerless months. The
Senate, meanwhile, is tied in knots by wannabe presidents and aspiring talk-show hosts, who use the chamber as a
social-media platform to build their brands by obstructing - well, everything. The Defense Department is among
hundreds of agencies that have not been reauthorized, the government has shut down three times, and, yes, it finally
happened: The United States briefly defaulted on the national deb, precipitating a market collapse and an economic
downturn. No one wanted that outcome, but no one was able to prevent it

‘As the presidential primaries unfold, Kanye West is leading a fractured field of Democrats. The Republican
front-runner is Phil Robertson, of Duck Dynasty fame. Elected governor of Louisiana only a few months ago, he is,
promising to defy the Washington establishment by never trimming his beard. Party elders have given up all pretense
‘of being more than spectators, and most ofthe candidates have given up all pretense of party loyalty. On the debate
stages, and everywhere else, anything goes.

| could continue, but you get the gist. Yes, the political future I've described is unreal, Butitis also a linear
extrapolation of several trends on vivid display right now. Astonishingly, the 2016 Republican presidential race has
been dominated by a candidate who is not, in any meaningful sense, a Republican. According to registration records,
since 1987 Donald Trump has been a Republican, then an independent, then a Democrat, then a Republican, then ‘I
do not wish to enroll in party,” then a Republican; he has donated to both parties; he has shown loyalty o and affinity
for neither. The second-place candidate, Republican Senator Ted Cruz, built his brand by tearing down his party's
slurring the Senate Republican leader, rang against the Republican establishment, and closing the government as a
career move,

Former presidential hopeful Jeb Bush called Donald Tramp “a chaos candidate,” Unortune
Bush Trump's supporters dnt mind. They ted that about him. (Charies Rex Arbogast /AP)

‘The Republicans’ noisy breakdown has been echoed eerily, albeit less loudly, on the Democratic side, where,
after the early primaries, one ofthe two remaining contestants for the nomination was not, in any meaningful sense, a
Democrat. Senator Bernie Sanders was an independent who switched to nominal Democratic afliation on the day he
filed for the New Hampshire primary, only three months before that election. He surged into second place by winning
independents while losing Democrats. If it had been up to Democrats to choose their pary’s nominee, Sanders's bid
‘would have collapsed after Super Tuesday. In their various ways, Trump, Cruz, and Sanders are demonstrating a new
principle: The politcal parties no longer have either inteligible boundaries or enforceable norms, and, as a result,
renegade politcal behavior pays.

Political disintegration plagues Congress, too. House Republicans barely managed to elect a speaker last
year. Congress did agree in the fall on a budget framework intended to keep the govemment open through the
election—a signal accomplishment, by today's low standards — but by April hard-line conservatives had revoked the
deal, thereby humiliating the new speaker and potentially causing another shutdown crisis this fall. As of his writing,
it's not clear whether the hard-liners will push tothe brink, but the bigger points ths: If they do, there is not much that
party leaders can do about it

‘And here isthe stil bigger point: The very term party leaders has become an anachronism. Although Capitol
Hill and the campaign tral are miles apart, the breakdown in order in both places reflects the underlying realty that
there no longer is any such thing asa party leader. There are only individual actors, pursuing their own politcal interests
and ideological missions willy-nilly, ike excited gas molecules in an overheated balloon.

No wonder Paul Ryan, taking the gavel as the new (and reluctant) House speaker in October, complained
that the American people “look at Washington, and all they see is chaos. What arelef to them it would be if we finally
{got our act together.” No one seemed inclined to disagree. Nor was there much argument two months later when Jeb
Bush, his presidential campaign sinking, used the c-word in a different but equally apt context. Donald Trump, he said,
is a chaos candidate, and he'd be a chaos president." Unfortunately for Bush, Trump's supporters didn't mind. They
liked that about him.

Trump, however, didn't cause the chaos. The chaos caused Trump. What we are seeing is not a temporary
spasm of chaos but @ chaos syndrome.

Chaos syndrome isa chronic decline inthe politcal systems capacity for selt organization. It begins with the
weakening of the institutions and brokers—poliical parties, career polticians, and congressional leaders and
‘committees —that have historically held politicians accountable to one another and prevented everyone inthe system
{rom pursuing naked sel-nterest all the time. As these intermediaries’ influence fades, politicians, activists, and voters
all become more individualistic and unaccountable. The system atomizes. Chaos becomes the new normal—both in
‘campaigns and in the government ise.

< 2/7

>

{In ther diferent ways, Donald Trump and Bamie Sanders have demonstrated that the major political
aries no longer have intligibe boundaries or enforoeable noms. (Charle Neibergal/ AP)

Our intricate, informal system of political intermediation, which took many decades to build, did not commit
suicide or die of old age; we reformed it to death. For decades, welkmeaning politcal reformers have attacked
intermediaries as corupt, undemocratic, unnecessary, or (usually) all of the above. Americans have been busy
demonizing and disempowering politcal professionals and parties, which is like spending decades abusing and
attacking your own immune system. Eventually, you wil get sick.

The disorder has other causes, too: developments such as ideological polarization, the rise of social media,
and the radicalization ofthe Republican base. But chaos syndrome compounds the effects of those developments, by
impeding the task of organizing to counteract them. Insurgencies in presidental races and on Capito Hil are nothing
new, and they are not necessarily bad, as long as the governing process can accommodate them. Years before the
Senate had to cope with Ted Cruz, it had to cope with Jesse Helms. The difference is that Cruz shut down the
‘government, which Helms could not have done had he even imagined trying,

Like many disorders, chaos syndrome is self-reinforcing. It causes govemmental dysfunction, which fuels
public anger, which incites poltcal disruption, which causes yet more governmental dysfunction, Reversing the spiral
will require understanding it. Consider, then, the etiology ofa poltcal disease: the immune system that defended the
body politic for two centuries; the gradual dismanting of that immune system; the emergence of pathogens capable of
exploiting the new vulnerability; the symptoms of the disorder, an, finally its prognosis and treatment

Immunity
Why the political class is a good thing

‘The Founders knew all too well about chaos. It was the condition that brought them together in 1787 under
the Articles of Confederation. The central government had too few powers and powers of the wrong kinds, so they
gave it more powers, and also multiple power centers. The core idea of the Constitution was to restrain ambition and
«excess by forcing competing powers and factions to bargain and compromise

The Framers worried about demagogic excess and populist capice, so they created buffers and gatekeepers,
between voters and the government, Only one chamber, the House of Representatives, would be diecly elected. A
radical who wanted to get into the Senate would need to get past the state legislature, which selected senators; a
usurper who wanted to seize the presidency would need to get past the Electoral College, a convocation of elders who
chose the president; and so on.

They were visionaries, those men in Philadelphia, but they could not foresee everything, and they made a
‘serious omission. Unlike the British parliamentary system, the Constitution makes no provision for holding politicians
accountable to one another. A rogue member of Congress can't be “fred” by his party leaders, as a member of
Parliament can; a renegade president cannot be evicted in a vote of no confidence, as a British prime minister can. By
and large, American potiians are independ aE FRjpecame even more independent when later

reforms, in the 19th and early 20th centuries, neutered the Electoral College and established direct election to the
Senate.

‘The Constitution makes no mention of many ofthe essential political structures that we take for granted, such
as politcal parties and congressional committees. Ifthe Constitution were all we had, politicians would be incapable of
getting organized to accomplish even routine tasks. Every day, for every bill or compromise, they would have to start
from scratch, rounding up hundreds of individual poftcians and answering to thousands of squabbling constituencies
‘and millions of voters By itself, the Constitution isa recipe for chaos,

So Americans developed a second, unwritten constitution. Beginning in the 1790s, politicians sorted
themselves into partes. In the 1830s, under Andrew Jackson and Martin Van Buren, the parties established patronage
machines and grass-roots bases. The machines and parties used rewards and the occasional punishment to
encourage poltcians to work together. Meanwhile, Congress developed its seniority and committee systems,
rewarding reliability and establishing cooperative routines. Parties, leaders, machines, and congressional hierarchies
built densely woven incentive structures that bound politicians into coherent teams. Personal alliances, financial
contributions, promotions and prestige, politcal perks, pork-barrel spending, endorsements, and sometimes a trip to
the woodshed or the wildemess: All f those incentives and others, including some of dubious respectability, cam into
play. Ifthe Constitution was the systems DNA, the parties and machines and politcal brokers were its RNA, translating

the Founders’ bare-bones framework into dynamic organizations and thus converting confit into action.
i)

‘Senate Meonty Leader Mich MeConnel proved unable fo rein in Ted Cruz. (Tom Wilams/ CQ Ral Cal/Gety)

The informal constitutions intermediaries have many names and faces: state and national party committees,
‘county party chairs, congressional subcommittees, leadership PACs, convention delegates, bundlers, and countless
more. For purposes of this essay, I'l call them all middlemen, because all of them mediated between disorganized
swarms of poltcians and disorganized swarms of voters, thereby performing the indispensable task that the great
political scientist James Q. Wilson called ‘assembling power inthe formal government.”

‘The middlemen could be undemocratic, high-handed, devious, secretive. But they had one great virtue: They
brought order from chaos. They encouraged coordination, interdependency, and mutual accountabilty. They
ciscouraged solipsistic and antisocial poltical behavior. A loyal, time-serving member of Congress could expect easy
renomination, financial help, promotion through the ranks of committees and leadership jobs, and a new airport or
research center for his district. A turncoat or troublemaker, by contrast, could expect to encounter ostracism,
marginalization, and dificuties wit fund-raising. The system was hierarchical, but it was not authoritarian. Even the
lowlest precinct walker or officeholder had a role and a voice and could expecta reward for loyalty even the highest
party boss had to cater to multiple constituencies and fend off periodic challengers.

Parties, machines, and hacks may not have been pretty, but at their best they did their job so well that the
country forgot why it needed them. Polos seemed almost to organize itself, but only because the middlemen recruited
‘and nurtured political talent, vetted candidates fog ly, gathered and dispensed money, built bases
‘of donors and supporters, forged coalitions, bo diated disputes, brokered compromises, and

‘greased the skids to turn those compromises into law. Though sometimes arrogant, middlemen were not generally
elitist. They excelled at organizing and representing unsophisticated voters, as Tammany Hall famously did for the
‘working-class Irish of New York, to the horror of many Progressives who viewed the Irish working class as unfit to
govern or even to vote

House Speaker Paul Ryan has aready faced arebetion. The realty is that
there no longer is any such thing asa “pary leader (Ciff Oven AP)

The old machines were inclusive only by the standards oftheir day, of course. They were bad on race—but
then, so were Progressives such as Woodrow Wilson, The more intrinsic hazard with middlemen and machines is the
‘ever-present potential for coruption, which isa real problem. On the other hand, overreacting to the threat of corruption
by stamping out influence-pedaling (as distinct from bribery and extortion) is just as harmful. Political contributions, for
‘example, look unseemly, but they play a vital role as political bonding agents. When a party raised a soft- money
<onation from a millionaire and used it to support a candidate's campaign (a common practice untl the 2002 McCain-
Feingold law banned i in federal elections), the exchange of favors tied a knot of mutual accountability that linked
‘candidate, party, and donor together and forced each to think about the interests ofthe others. Such transactions may
not have comported with the Platonic ideal of democracy, but in the real world they did much to stabilize the system
and discourage selfish behavior.

Middlemen have a characteristic that is essential in politics: They stick around. Because careerists and hacks
make their living off the system, they have a stake in assembling durable coalitions, in retaining power overtime, and
in keeping the government in functioning order. Slash-and-bumn protests and quixotic ideological crusades are luxuries
they can't afford, Insurgents and renegades have a role, which i to jolt the system with new energy and ideas; but
professionals also have a role, whichis to safely absorb the energy that insurgents unleash. Think of them as analogous
to antibodies and white blood cells, establishing and patroling the barriers between the body politic and would-be
hijackers on the outside. As with biology, so with politics: When the immune system works, itis largely invisible. Only
‘when it breaks down do we become aware of its importance.

Vulnerability
How the war on middlemen left America defenseless

Beginning early in the 20th century, and continuing right up to the present, reformers and the public turned
against every aspect of insider politics: professional politicians, closed-door negotiations, personal favors, parly
bosses, financial tes, all fit

Progressives accused middlemen of subverting the public interest; populists accused them of obstructing the
peor’ il consonatis aeoeed thom of Bc s/u > event

To some extent, the reformers were right. They had good intentions and valid complaints. Back in the 1970s,
‘a8 a teenager in the post-Watergate era, | was on their side. Why allow politicians ever to meet behind closed doors?
Sunshine is the best disinfectant! Why allow private money to buy favors and distort policy making? Ban it and use
Treasury funds to finance elections! It was easy, in those days, to see that there was dirty water inthe tub, What was
not so evident was the reason the water was diy, which was the baby. So we started reforming,

We reformed the nominating process. The use of primary elections instead of conventions, caucuses, and
‘other insider-dominated processes dates to the era of Theodore Roosevelt, but primary elections and party influence
‘coexisted through the 1960s; especially in congressional and state races, party leaders had many ways to influence
nominations and vet candidates. According to Jon Meacham, in his biography of George H.W. Bush, here is how
Bush's father, Prescott Bush, got started in politics: “Samuel F. Pryor, a top Pan Am executive and a mover in
Connecticut polities, called Prescott to ask whether Bush might ike to run for Congress. if you would,’ Pryor said,‘
think we can assure you that youll be the nominee." Today, party insiders can stl jawbone ait it, but, as the 2016
presidential race has made all too clear, there is startlingly itl they can do to influence the nominating process.

Primary races now tend to be dominated by highly motivated extremists and interest groups, with the perverse
result of leaving moderates and broader, less well-organized constituencies underrepresented. According to the Pew
Research Center, in the fst 12 presidental-primary contests of 2016, only 17 percent of eligible voters participated in
Republican primaries, and only 12 percent in Democratic primaries. In other words, Donald Trump seized the lead in
the primary process by winning a mere plurality ofa mere fraction ofthe electorate. In off-year congressional primaries,
‘when turnout is even lower, i's even easier fr the tail to wag the dog. In the 2010 Delaware Senate race, Christine “|
‘am not a witeh” O'Donnell secured the Republican nomination by winning just a sixth of the state's registered
Republicans, thereby handing a competitive seat to the Democrats. Surveying congressional primaries for a 2014
Brookings Institution report, the journalists Jill Lawrence and Walter Shapiro observed: “The universe of those who
actually cast primary ballots is small and hyper-partisan, and rewards candidates who hew to ideological orthodoxy.”
By contrast, party hacks tend to shop for candidates who exert broad appeal in a general election and who will sustain
‘and buld the party's brand, so they generally lean toward relative moderates and team players.

Moreover, recent research by the politcal scientists Jamie L. Carson and Jason M. Roberts finds that party
leaders of yore did a better job of encouraging qualified mainstream candidates to challenge incumbents. “in
‘congressional districts across the country, party leaders were able to carefully select candidates who would contribute
to the collective good ofthe ticket," Carson and Roberts write in their 2013 book, Ambition, Competition, and Electoral
Reform: The Politics of Congressional Elections Across Time. ‘Ths led toa plentiful supply of quality candidates willing
to enter races, since the potential costs of running and losing were largely underwritten by the party organization” The
switch to direct primaries, in which contenders generally seltrecruit and succeed or fal on their own account, has
produced more oddball and extreme challengers and thereby made general elections less competitive, “A series of
reforms that were intended to create more open and less ‘insider’ dominated elections actually produced more
entrenched politicians,” Carson and Roberts write. The paradoxical result is that members of Congress today are
simultaneously less responsive to mainstream interests and harder to dislodge.

Was the switch to direct public nomination a net benefit or drawback? The answer to that question is
subjective. But one effect isnot in doubt: Insttuionalists have less power than ever before to protect loyalists who play
‘well with other poicians, or who take a tough congressional vote forthe team, or who dare to cross single-issue voters
and interests; and they have litle capacity to fend off insurgents who owe nothing to anybody. Walled safely inside
their gerrymandered districts, incumbents are insulated from general-election challenges that might pull them toward
the poltical centr, but they are perpetually vulnerable to primary challenges from extremists who pull them toward the
fringes. Everyone worries about being the next Eric Cantor, the Republican House majority leader who, in a shocking
upset, lost to an unknown Tea Parter in his 2014 primary. Legislators are scared of voting for anything that might
increase the odds ofa primary challenge, which is one reason its so hard to raise the debt mit or pass a budget

In March, when Republican Senator Jerry Moran of Kansas told a Rotary Club meeting that he thought
President Obama's Supreme Court nominee deserved a Senate hearing, the Tea Party Patriots immediately responded

with what has become activists’ go-to threat: I fcc > fil that leads Tea Party Patriots Citizens

Fund activists and supporters to think seriously about encouraging Dr. Mion Wolf'—a physician and Tea Party
activist—to run against Sen. Moran in the August GOP primary.” (Moran hastened to issue a statement saying that he
‘would oppose Obama's nominee regardless.) Purist issue groups often have the whip hand now, and unlike the elected
bosses of yore, they are accountable only to themselves and are able merely to prevent legisative action, not to
organize it

We reformed politcal money. Starting in the 1970s, large-dollar donations to candidates and parties were
subject to a tightening web of regulations. The idea was to reduce corruption (or is appearance) and curtail the power
of special interests—certainly laudable goals. Campaign- finance rules dd stop some egregious transactions, but at a
cost: Instead of eliminating money from poltics (whichis impossible, the rules diverted much oft to private channels,
Whereas the parties themselves were once largely responsible for raising and spending political money, in their place
has arisen a burgeoning ecology of deep-pocketed donors, super PACS, 501(c)(4)s, and so-called 527 groups that
now spend hundreds of milions of dollars each cycle. The result has been the creation of an array of private political
machines across the county: for instance, the Koch brothers’ Americans for Prosperity and Karl Rove's American
Crossroads on the right, and Tom Steyer’s NextGen Climate on the left

Private groups are much harder to regulate, less transparent, and less accountable than are the parties and
candidates, who do, at the end of the day, have to face the voters. Because they thrive on purism, protest, and
parochialism, the outside groups are driving politics toward polarization, extremism, and short-term gain. "You may win
or lose, but atleast you have been intellectually consistent—your principles haven't been defeated,” an oficial with
‘Americans for Prosperity told The Economist in October 2014. The partes, despite being called to judgment by voters
{or their performance, face all kinds of constraints and regulations thatthe private groups don't, ting the playing field
‘against them. “The internal conversation we've been having is “How do we keep state parties aive?’” the director of a
mountain-state Democratic Party organization told me and Raymond J. La Raja recently for a Brookings Institution
report. Republicans told us the same story. "We believe we are fighting for our lives in the current legal and judicial
framework, and the super PACs and 501(c)(4)s really presenta direct threat tothe state parties’ existence," a southern
state's Republican Party director said

The state partes also told us they can't begin to match the advertising money flowing from outside groups
and candidates, Weakened by regulations and resource constraints, they have been reduced to spectators, while
‘candidates and groups form circular fring squads and alienate voters. At the national level, the situation is even more
‘chaotio—and ripe for exploitation by a savvy demagogue who can make himself heard above the din, as Donald Trump
has so shrewdly proved.

We reformed Congress. For a long time, seniority ruled on Capitol Hill. To exercise power, you had to wait for
years, and chairs ran their committees like fiefs. It was an arrangement that hardly seemed either mertocratic or
‘democratic. Starting with a rebellion by the liberal post- Watergate class in the''70s, and then accelerating with the rise
‘of Newt Gingrich and his conservative revolutionaries in the '90s, the seniority and committee systems came under
attack and withered. Power on the Hill has flowed both up to a few top leaders and down to individual members
Unfortunately, the reformers overlooked something important: Senioity and committee spots rewarded teamwork and
loyalty, they ensured that people at the top were experienced, and they hamessed hundreds of middle-ranking
members of Congress to the tasks of legislating. Compounding the problem, Gingrich’s Republican revolutionaries,
eager to prove their ant-Washington bona fides, cut committee staffs by a third, further diminishing Congress's
institutional horsepower.

Congress's attempts to replace hierarchies and middlemen with top-down diktat and ad hoc working groups
have mosty failed. More than perhaps ever before, Congress today is a collection of individual entrepreneurs and
pressure groups. In the House, disintermediation has shifted the balance of power toward a small bt cohesive minority
of conservative Freedom Caucus members who think nothing of wielding their power against their own leaders. Last
year, as House Republicans struggled to agree on a new speaker, the conservatives did not blush at demanding “the
right to oppose their leaders and vote down legislation without repercussions,” as Time magazine reported. In the
Senate, Ted Cruz made himself a leading presidential contender by engaging in debt-imitbrinkmanship and dering

the party's leadership, going so far as to call Beco alia on the Senate floor. "The rhetorio—
< 7/14 >

‘and confrontational stance—are classic Cruz," wrote Burgess Everett in Politico last October: “Stake out a position to
the right of where his leaders will end up, criticize them for ignoring him and conservative grass-roots voters, then use
the ensuing internecine fight to stoke his presidental bid.” No wonder his colleagues detest him. But Cruz was doing
what makes sense in an age of maximal politcal individualism, and we can safely bet that his success will inspire
imitation

We reformed closed-door negotiations. As recently asthe early 1970s, congressional committees could easily
retreat behind closed doors and members could vote on many bills anonymously, with only the final tallies reported.
Federal advisory committees, too, could meet off the record. Understandably, in the wake of Watergate, those practices.
‘came to be viewed as suspect. Today, federal law, congressional rules, and public expectations have placed almost
all formal deliberations and many informal ones in fll public view. One result is greater transparency, which is good.
But another results that finding space for delicate negotiations and candid deliberations can be dificult, Smoke-flled
rooms, whatever their disadvantages, were good for brokering complex compromises in which nothing was settled unt
‘everything was settled; once gone, they turned out fo be difficult to replace. In publi, interest groups and grandstanding
politicians can tear apart a compromise before it is halfway settled

Despite promising to televise negotiations over health-care reform, President Obama went behind closed
doors with interest groups to put the package together; no sane person would have negotiated in full public view. In
2013, Congress succeeded in approving a modest bipartisan budget deal in large measure because the House and
Senate Budget Commitee chairs were empowered to “igure itout themselves, very very privately,” as one Democratic,
aide told Jill Lawrence for a 2015 Brookings report. TV cameras, recorded votes, and public markups do increase
transparency, but they come at the cost of complicating candid conversations. “The idea that Washington would work
better if there were TV cameras monitoring every conversation gets it exactly wrong,” the Democratic former Senate
majority leader Tom Daschle wrote in 2014, in his foreword to the book City of Rivals. “The lack of opportunities for
honest dialogue and creative give-and-take lies atthe root of today’s dysfunction.”

We reformed pork. For most of American history, a principal goal of any member of Congress was to bring
home bacon for his astit, Pork-barel spending never really cost very much, and it helped glue Congress together by
giving members a kind of currency to trade: You support my pork, and Il support yours. Also, because pork was
cispensed by powerful appropriations committees with input from senior congressional leaders, it provided a handy
‘way for the leadership to buy votes and reward loyalists, Stating in the '70s, however, and then snowballing in the
‘905, the regular appropriations process broke down, a casualty of reforms that weakened approprators’ power, of
“sunshine laws" that reduced their autonomy, and of polarization that complicated negotiations. Conservatives and
liberals alike attacked pork- barreling as corrupt, culminating in early 2011, when a strange-bedfellows coalton of Tea
Partiers and progressives banned earmarking, the practice of dropping goodies into bills as a way to attract votes—
including, ironically, votes for politically painful spending reductions

Congress has not passed all its annual appropriations bills in 20 years, and more than $300 billion a year in
federal spending goes out the door without proper authorization. Routine business such as passing a farm bill or a
surface-transportation bill now takes years instead of weeks or months to complete. Today two-thirds of federal-
program spending (excluding interest on the national debt) runs on formula-driven autopilot. This automatic spending
by so-called entitlement programs eludes the discipline of being regularly voted on, dwarfs old-fashioned pork in
magnitude, and is so hard to restrain that it's often called the third rail’ of poli. The political cost has also been high:
Congressional leaders lost one of their last remaining tools to induce followership and team play. “Trying o be a leader
here you have no sticks and very few carrots is dang near impossible,” the Republican former Senate Majority Leader
Trent Lott told CNN in 2013, shorty after renegade Republicans poinlessly shut down the government, “Members
<dn't get anything from you and leaders don’ give anything. They dont feel ike you can reward them or punish them.”

‘Donald Trump had no political debs or party loyal. And he had no compunctons—hich made
him the perfec vector fr ant-etabshment sentiment. (John Bazerore / AP)

Like campaign contributions and smoke-filed rooms, pork is tool of democratic governance, nota violation
oft It can be used for corrupt purposes but also, very often for vital ones. AS the political scientist Diana Evans wrote
in a 2004 book, Greasing the Wheels: Using Pork Bartel Projects to Build Majority Coalitions in Congress, “The irony
is this: pork barreling, despite its much maligned status, gets things done.” In 1964, to cite one famous example, Lyndon
Johnson could not have passed his landmark civ-rights bill without support from House Republican leader Charles
Halleck of Indiana, who named his price: a NASA research grant for his district, which LBJ was glad to provide. Just
last year, Republican Senator John McCain, the chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, was asked how
his committee managed to pass bipartisan authorization bills year ater year, even as the rest of Congress ground to a
legislative standstil. In part, McCain explained, it was because “there's a lot in there for members of the committees.”

Party-dominated nominating processes, soft money, congressional seniority, closed-door negotiations, pork-
barrel spending—put each practice under a microscope in isolation, and it seems an unsavory way of doing political
business. But sweep them all away, and one finds that business is not getting done at all. The politcal reforms of the
past 40 or so years have pushed toward disintermediation—by favoring amateurs and outsiders over professionals
and insiders; by privileging populism and selt-expression over mediation and mutual restraint; by stripping middlemen
of tools they need to organize the poltica system. All ofthe reforms promote an individualistic, atomized model of
paltcs in which there are candidates and there are voters, but there is nothing in between. Other, larger trends, to be
sure, have also contributed to politcal disorganization, but the war on middlemen has amplfied and accelerated them.

Pathogens
Donald Trump and other viruses

By the beginning of this decade, the political system's organic defenses against outsiders and insurgents were
visibly crumbling. All that was needed was for the right virus to come along and exploit the opening. As it happened,
two came along,

In 2009, on the heels of President Obama's election and the economic-bailout packages, angry fiscal
conservatives launched the Tea Party insurgency and watched, somewhat to their own astonishment, as it swept the
‘country. Tea Partiers shared some of the policy predilections of loyal Republican partisans, but their mind-set was
angrily anti-establishment. In a 2013 Pew Research poll, more than 70 percent of them disapproved of Republican

leaders in Congress. In a 2010 Pew pol, ” Ey y similar margins. They thought nothing of
< 9/14 >

mounting primary challenges against Republican incumbents, and they made a special point of targeting Republicans
‘who compromised with Democrats or even with Republican leaders. In Congress, the Republican House leadership
soon found itself facing a GOP caucus whose members were too worried about “getting primaried” to vote for the
‘compromises necessary to govern—or even to keep the government open. Threats from the Tea Party and other purist
factions often outweigh any blandishments or protection that leaders can offer.

So far the Democrats have been mostly spared the ant-compromise insurrection, but their defenses are not
much stronger. Molly Ball recently reported for The Atlantic's Web site on the Working Families Party, whose purpose
is “to make Democratic politicians more accountable to their liberal base through the asymmetric warfare party
primaries enable, much as the conservative movement has done to Republicans.” Because African Americans and
union members stil mostly behave like party loyalists, and because the Democratic base does not want to see
President Obama fil the Tea Party trick hasn't yet worked on the left. But the Democrats are vulnerable structurally,
and the ant-compromise virus is out there.

‘A second virus was intially identified in 2002, by the University of Nebraska at Lincoln political scientists John
R. Hibbing and Elizabeth Theiss-Morse, in their book Stealth Democracy: Americans’ Beliefs About How Government
Should Work. It's a shocking book, one whose implications other scholars were understandably reluctant to engage
with. The rise of Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders, however, makes confronting is thesis unavoidable.

Using polls and focus groups, Hibbing and Theiss-Morse found that between 25 and 40 percent of Americans
(depending on how one measures) have a severely distorted view of how government and poltcs are supposed to
‘work, | think of these people as “politiphobes,” because they see the contentious give-and-take of politics as
unnecessary and distasteful. Specially, they believe that obvious, commonsense solutions tothe country's problems
are out there forthe plucking, The reason these obvious solutions are not enacted is that politicians are corrupt, or self-
interested, or addicted to unnecessary partisan feuding. Not surprisingly, poliphobes think the obvious, commonsense
solutions are the sorts of solutions that they themselves prefer. But the more important point is that they do not
‘acknowledge that meaningful polcy disagreement even exists. From that premise, they conclude that all the arguing
and partisanship and horse-trading that go on in American politics are entirely unnecessary. Politicians could easily
solve all our problems if they would only set aside their craven personal agendas.

If politicians won't do the job, then who wil? Poltiphobes, according to Hibbing and Theiss- Morse, believe
policy should be made not by messy political confict and negotiations but by ENSIDs: empathetic, non-sel-nterested
decision makers. These are leaders who will step forward, cast aside cowardly politicians and venal special interest,
‘and implement long- overdue solutions. ENSIDs can be poltcians, technocrats, or autocrats—whatever works,
Whether the process is democratic is not particularly important,

Chances are that poltiphobes have been out there since long before Hibbing and Theiss-Morse identified
them in 2002, Unlike the Tea Party or the Working Families Party, they aren't particularly ideological: They have popped
Up left ight, and center. Ross Perot's independent presidential candidacies of 1992 and 1996 appealed to the idea
that any sensible businessman could knock heads together and fix Washington. In 2008, Barack Obama pandered to
a center-left version ofthe same fantasy, promising to magically transcend partisan politics and implement the best
solutions from both parties

No previous outbreak, however, compares with the latest one, which draws unprecedented virulence from two
developments. One is a steep rise in antipoltcal sentiment, especially on the right. According to poling by Pew, from
2007 to early 2016 the percentage of Americans saying they would be less likely to vote for a presidential candidate
\who had been an elected oficial in Washington for many years than for an outsider candidate more than doubled, from
15 percent to 31 percent. Republican opinion has shitted more sharply stil: The percentage of Republicans preferring
“new ideas and a different approach” over “experience and a proven record” almost doubled in just the six months from
March to September of 2015,

The other development, of course, was Donald Trump, the perfect vector to concentrate poliiphobic
sentiment, intensity it, and inject into presidential potics. He had too much money and free media to be spent out of
the race. He had no political record to defend. He had no politcal debts or party loyalty. He had no compunctions,

There was nothing to restrain him from “a fantasy with perfect pitch,

Democrats have not been immune, either. Lite Trump, Bemie Sanders appealed to the antipolitical idea that
the mere act of voting for him would prompta “revolution” that would somehow clear up such knotty problems as health-
care coverage, financial reform, and money in poltcs. Like Trump, he was a set sufficient outsider without customary
paltcal debts or party loyalty. Like Trump, he neither acknowledged nor cared-—because his supporters neither
acknowledged nor cared—that his plans for governing were delusional.

Trump, Sanders, and Ted Cruz have in common tha they ae poitcal sociopaths—meaning not that they are
crazy, but that they don't care what other poitcians think about their behavior and they don't need to care. That three
‘of the four final presidential contenders in 2016 were poitcal sociopaths is a sign of how far chaos syndrome has gone.
‘The old, mediated system selected such people out. The new, disintermediated system seems to be selecting them i,

Symptoms
The disorder that exacerbates all other disorders

There is nothing new about polticalinsurgencies in the United States—nor anything inherently wrong with
them. Just the opposite, in fact: Insurgencies have brought fresh ideas and renewed participation to the political system
since at least the time of Andrew Jackson.

There is also nothing new about insiders losing control of the presidential nominating process. In 1964 and
1972, to the dismay of party regulars, nominations went to unelectable candidates Barry Goldwater for the
Republicans in 1964 and George McGovern for the Democrats in 1972—who thrilled the parties’ activist bases and
‘went on to predictably epic defeats. So it's tempting to say, “Democracy is messy. Insurgents have fair gripes.
Incumbents should be challenged. Who are you, Mr. Establishment, to say the system is broken merely because you
don't like the people it is pushing forward?”

‘The problem is not, however, that disruptions happen. The problem is that chaos syndrome wreaks havoc on
the system's ability to absorb and channel disruptions. Trying to quash political disruptions would probably only create
more of them. The trick is to be able to govern through them,

Leave aside the fact that Goldwater and McGovern, although ideologues, were estimable figures within their
patie, (McGovern actually co-chaired a Democratic Party commission that rewrote the nominating rues after 1968,
‘opening the way for his own campaign.) Neither of them, either as senator or candidate, wanted to or aid disrupt the
ordinary workings of government.

Jason Grumet, the president of the Bipartisan Policy Center and the author of City of Rivals, likes to point out
that within three weeks of Bill Clinton's impeachment by the House of Representatives, the president was signing new
laws again, ‘While they were impeaching him they were negotiating, they were taking, they were having committee
hearings,” Grumet said in a recent speech. “And so we have to ask ourselves, whats it that not long ago allowed our
{government to metabolize the aggression thats inherent in any pluralistic society and stil get things done?”

\have been covering Washington since the early 1980s, and I've seen alot of gridlock. Sometimes I've been
{grateful for gridlock, which is an appropriate outcome when there is no working majority for a particular policy. For me,
however, 2011 brought a wake-up call. The system was failing even when there was a working majority. That year,
President Obama and Republican House Speaker John Boehner, in intense personal negotiations, tried to clinch a
budget agreement that touched both parties’ sacred cows, curtailing growth in the major entitlement programs such as
Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security by hundreds of billions of dollars and increasing revenues by $800 billion or
more over 10 years, as well as reducing defense and nondefense discretionary spending by more than $1 tlion
‘Though it was less grand than previous budgetary “grand bargains,” the package represented the kind of bipartisan
‘accommodation that constitutes the federal government's best and perhaps only path to long term fiscal stabi

People still debate why the package fell apart, and there is blame enough to go around. My own reading at
the time, however, concurred with Matt Bai's postmortem in The New York Times: Democratic leaders could have
found the rank-and-file support they needed to pass the bargain, but Boehner could not get the deal past conservatives
in his own caucus. ‘What's undeniable, despite al the furous efforts to peddle a different story,” Bai wrote, “s that
Obama managed to persuade his closest alies to sign off on what he wanted them to do, and Boehner didn't, or

couldn't.” We'll never know, but | believe that t ise Boehner and Obama tried to shake hands
< 11/14 >

(on, had it reached a vote, would have passed with solid majorities in both chambers and been signed into law. The
problem was not polarization; it was disorganization. A latent majority could not muster and assert itself.

mer House Speaker John Boohner explained to Jay Leno before he resigned: "Youeamn
that leader wihoutfolowes is simply aman taking a walk (Steve Heber / AP)

‘As soon became apparent, Boehner’s 2011 debacle was not a glitch but part of an emerging patter. Two
years later, the House's conservative faction shut down the government wit the connivance of Ted Cruz, the very last
thing most Republicans wanted to happen. When Boehner was asked by Jay Leno why he had permitted what the
speaker himself called a “very predictable disaster,” he replied, rather poignantly: “When I looked up, | saw my
colleagues going this way. You lear that a leader without followers is simply a man taking a walk.”

Boehner was right. Washington doesn't have a crisis of leadership it has a crisis of followership. One can
argue about particulars, and Congress does better on some occasions than on others. Overall, though, minority factions
‘and veto groups are becoming ever more dominant on Capitol Hil as leaders watch their organizational capacity dribble
‘away. Helpless fo do much more than beg for suppor, and hostage to his own party's fr right, an exhausted Boehner
finally gave up and quit last year. Almost immediately, his heir apparent, Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, was shot to
pieoes too. No wonder Paul Ryan, in his first act as speaker, remonstrated with his own colleagues against chaos.

Nevertheless, by spring the new speaker was bogged down. “Almost six months into the job, Ryan and his
top lieutenants face questions about whether the Wisconsin Republican's tenure atop the House is any more effective
than his predecessor,” Poitico's Web site reported in April. The House Republican Conference, an unnamed
Republican told Politico, is “unwhippable and unleadable. Ryan is as talented as you can be: There's nobody better
But even he can't do anything, Who could?”

Of course, Congress's incompetence makes the electorate even more disgusted, which leads to even greater
political volatility. In a Republican presidental debate in March, Ohio Governor John Kasich described the cycle this
way: The people, he said, want change, and they keep putting outsiders into bring about the change. Then the change
doesn't come ... because we're putting people in that don't understand compromise.” Disruption in politics and
dysfunction in government reinforce each other. Chaos becomes the new normal

Being a disorder of the immune system, chaos syndrome magnifies other problems, tuming political head
colds into pneumonia. Take polarization. Over the past few decades, the public has become sharply divided across
partisan and ideological lines. Chaos syndrome compounds the problem, because even when Republicans and
Democrats do find something to work together on, the threat of an extremist primary challenge funded by a flood of
‘outside money makes them think twice—or not at all. Opportunities to make bipartisan legislative advances sip away.

Or take the new technologies that are revolutionizing the media. Today, a figure ike Trump can reach millions
through Twitter without needing to pass network-TV gatekeepers or spend a dime. A figure like Sanders can use the
Intemet to reach milions of donors without recourse to traditional fund-raising sources. Outside groups, friendly and
unfriendly alike, can drown out political candidates in their own races. (As a frustrated Cruz told a supporter about
‘outside groups ostensibly backing his presidential campaign, “Im left to just hope that what they say bears some
resemblance to what | actually believe”) Disruptive media technologies are nothing new in American politics; they have
arisen periodically since the early 19th century, as the historian Jill Lepore noted in a February article in The New
Yorker. What is new is the system's diffcuty in coping with them. Disintermediating technologies bring fresh voices,
into the fray, but they also bring atomization and cacophony. To organize coherent plays amid swarms of attack ads,
middlemen need to be able to coordinate the fund-raising and messaging of candidates and parties and actvists—
‘hich is what they are increasingly hard-pressed todo.

‘Assembling power to gover a sprawling, diverse, and increasingly divided democracy is inevitably hard
Chaos syndrome makes ital the harder. For Democrats, the disorder is merely chronic; for the Republican Party, itis
‘acute. Finding no precedent for what he called Trump's hijacking ofan entire politcal party, Jon Meacham went so fat
a8 to tell Joe Scarborough in The Washington Post that George W. Bush might prove to be the last Republican
president

Nearly everyone panned party regulars for not stopping Trump much earlier, but no one explained just how
the party regulars were supposed to have done that. Stopping an insurgency requires organizing a coalition against it,
but an incapacity to organize is the whole problem. The reality is that the levers and buttons parties and political
professionals might once have pulled and pushed had long since been disconnected.

Prognosis and Treatment
Chaos syndrome as a psychiatric disorder

I don't have a quick solution to the current mess, but | do think it would be easy, in principle, to start moving
in a better direction. Although retuming parties and middlemen to anything like their 18h-century glory is not
conceivable—or,in today's America, even desitable—strengthening parties and middlemen i very doable. Restictions
inhibiting the partes from coordinating with their own candidates serve to encourage poltical wildcating, so repeal
them. Limits on donations to the parties drive money to unaccountable outsiders, so lft them. Restoring the earmarks
that help grease legislative success requires nothing more than a change in congressional rules. And there are all
kinds of ways the parties could move insiders back to the center of the nomination process. If they wanted to, they
could require would-be candidates to get petition signatures from elected officials and county party chairs, or they could
send unbound delegates to their conventions (as several state parties are doing tis year, or they could enhance the
role of middlemen in a host of other ways.

Building party machines and poltical networks is what career poitcians naturally do, if they're alowed to do
it Solet them. not talking about rigging the system to exclude challengers or prevent insurgencies.m talking about
de-rigging the system to reduce its pervasive bias against middlemen. Then they can do their job, thereby making the
‘world safe for challengers and insurgencies.

Unfortunately, although the mechanics of de-rigging are fairly straightforward, the politics of it are hard. The
public is wedded to an anti-establishment narrative. The political-reform community is invested in direct participation,
transparency, fund-raising limits on parties, and other elements of the anti-intermediation worldview. The
establishment, to the extent that there stil is such athing, is demoralized and shattered, barely able to muster an
argument for its own existence.

But there are optimistic signs, too. Liberals in the campaign-finance-reform community are showing new
interest in strengthening the parties. Academics and commentators are getting a good look at politics without effective
‘organizers and cohesive organizations, and they are terrified. On Capitol Hill, conservatives and liberals alike are on
board with restoring regular order in Congress. In Washington insiders have had some success at reorganizing and
pushing back. No Senate Republican was defeated by a primary challenger in 2014, in part because then-Senate

Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, a machine politician par excellence, created a network of business allies to
‘counterpunch against the Tea Party

The biggest obstacle, | think, is the general public's reflexive, unreasoning hostity to politicians and the
process of poics. Neurotic hatred of the poltcal class is the country’s last universally acceptable form of bigotry
Because that problem is mental, not mechanical, it really is hard to remedy.

In March, a Trump supporter told The New York Times, “I want to see Trump go up there and do damage to
the Republican Party." Another said, “We know who Donald Trump is, and we're going to use Donald Trump to either
take over the G.O.P. or blow it up.” That kind of ant- establishment nihilism deserves no respect or accommodation in
‘American public life. Populism, individualism, and a skeptical attitude toward politics are all healthy up to a point, but
‘America has passed that point. Poltical professionals and parties have many shortcomings to answer for—including,
primarily on the Republican side, their self-mutilating embrace of anti-establishment rhetorio—but relentlessly bashing
them is no solution. You haven't heard anyone say this, but is time someone did: Our most pressing political problem
today is thatthe country abandoned the establishment, not the other way around,

‘ABOUT THE AUTHOR — JONATHAN RAUCH is a contributing editor at The Atlantic and National Journal and
a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution.

